staṃbhe ghaṭṭayato hiraṇyakaśipo: karṇau samācūrṇaya-
nnāghūrṇajjagadaṇḍakuṇḍakuharo ghorastavābhūdrava: |
śrutvā yaṃ kila daityarājahṛdaye pūrvaṃ kadāpyaśrutaṃ
kampa: kaścana saṃpapāta calito'pyambhojabhūrviṣṭarāt ||1||
stambhe ghaṭṭayata:	(as he) was striking at the pillar
hiraṇyakaśipo:	of Hiranyakashipu
karṇau samācūrṇayan-	splitting the ears
āghūrṇat-jagat-aṇḍa-kuṇḍa-kuhara:	making everything inside the vessel of Brahmaanda tremble
ghora:-tava-abhūt-rava:	(so) frightening was Thy roar
śrutvā yaṃ kila	hearing which indeed
daityarāja hṛdaye	in the heart of the Asura king
pūrvaṃ kadāpi-aśrutaṃ	(the roar) which had never been heard before
kampa: kaścana saṃpapāta	an indescribable trembling arose
calita:-api-ambhojabhū:-	shaken even was Brahmaa
viṣṭarāt	on his throne (in Satyaloka)
As Hiranyakashipu struck at the pillar, he heard a terrific sound which split his ears.Thy roar was so fierce that it made everything inside the vessel of Brahmaanda tremble. Hearing this sound which was never heard before, the Asura king felt an awesome and incredible shiver within. Even the lotus born Brahmaa was shaken from his throne.
daitye dikṣu visṛṣṭacakṣuṣi mahāsaṃrambhiṇi stambhata:
sambhūtaṃ na mṛgātmakaṃ na manujākāraṃ vapuste vibho |
kiṃ kiṃ bhīṣaṇametadadbhutamiti vyudbhrāntacitte'sure
visphūrjjaddhavalograromavikasadvarṣmā samājṛmbhathā: ||2||
daitye dikṣu visṛṣṭa-cakṣuṣi	as the Asura with his eyes rolling all around
mahāsaṃrambhiṇi	in great excitement
stambhata: sambhūtaṃ	emerging from the pillar
na mṛgātmakaṃ	(a form) neither of beast
na manujākāraṃ	nor of a human being
vapu:-te vibho	Thy form O Lord! (seeing)
kiṃ kiṃ bhīṣaṇam-etat-	What o what this terrifying
adbhutam-iti	and wondrous (being) is, thus
vyudbhrānta-citte-asure	when the Asura was in an agitated state of mind
visphūrjat-	expanding with
dhavala-ugra-roma-	white sharp hair
vikasat-varṣmā	shining body
samājṛmbhathā:	Thou grew up into
As the Asura cast his eyes all around in great confused excitement, from the pillar emerged, O Lord! Thy form which was neither of a beast nor of a human being. While the Asura in an agitated state of mind wondered as to what this terrific wondrous being might be, Thou expanded into a form with a shining body on which sharp hair was bristling.
taptasvarṇasavarṇaghūrṇadatirūkṣākṣaṃ saṭākesara-
protkampapranikumbitāṃbaramaho jīyāttavedaṃ vapu: |
vyāttavyāptamahādarīsakhamukhaṃ khaḍgogravalganmahā-
jihvānirgamadṛśyamānasumahādaṃṣṭrāyugoḍḍāmaram ||3||
tapta-svarṇa-savarṇa-	of molten gold in colour
ghūrṇat-	rolling
ati-rukṣa-ākṣaṃ	and very fierce eyes
saṭākesara protkampa-	the mane trembling
pranikumbit-ambaram-	covering the skies
aho jīyat-	O Hail! To it
tava-idaṃ vapu:	Thy this form
vyātta-vyāpta-mahādarī-sakha-mukhaṃ	(with an) open wide cave like mouth
khaḍga-ugra-valgan-mahā-jihvā-nirgama	like the pointed end of a sword, huge and lolling out tongue
adṛśyamāna-sumahā-daṃṣṭrāyuga-uḍḍāmaram	revealing a pair of huge molars extremely frightening
O Hail unto that form of Thine with fierce rolling eyes shining like molten gold, with quivering mane overcastting the skies, with a wide open cave like mouth, with a sword like huge tongue lolling out, revealing a pair of huge extremely fierce molars.
utsarpadvalibhaṅgabhīṣaṇahanu hrasvasthavīyastara-
grīvaṃ pīvaradośśatodgatanakhakrūrāṃśudūrolbaṇam |
vyomollaṅghi ghanāghanopamaghanapradhvānanirdhāvita-
spardhāluprakaraṃ namāmi bhavatastannārasiṃhaṃ vapu: ||4||
utsarpat-valibhaṅga-	the folds of the skin drawn upwards
bhīṣaṇa-hanu	rendering the look of the chin fierce
hrasva-sthavīya:-tara-grīvaṃ	short and very stout neck
pīvara-dośśata-udgata-nakha-	of the stout hundred hands' nails, emitting
krūrāṃśu-dūrolbaṇaṃ	most terrifying sharp rays
vyoma-ullaṅghi	the skies outreaching
ghanāghana-upama-ghana-pradhvāna-	the fierce roar like the thunder of a thick cloud
nirdhāvita-spardhālu-prakaraṃ	driving away the host of rivals
namāmi	I salute
bhavata:-tat-nārasiṃhaṃ vapu:	that form of Thine as Narasihma
I salute Thy Man-Lion form with chin rendered forbidding due to the folds of the skin drawn upwards (while roaring), with a short stout neck, with a hundred powerful arms projecting ferocious lustrous claws, with a terrific burst of roaring voice, resounding the skies and driving away the hosts of rivals in fright.
nūnaṃ viṣṇurayaṃ nihanmyamumiti bhrāmyadgadābhīṣaṇaṃ
daityendraṃ samupādravantamadhṛthā dorbhyāṃ pṛthubhyāmamum |
vīro nirgalito'tha khaḍgaphalakau gṛhṇanvicitraśramān
vyāvṛṇvan punarāpapāta bhuvanagrāsodyataṃ tvāmaho ||5||
nūnaṃ viṣṇu:-ayaṃ	He must indeed be Vishnu!
nihanmi-amum-iti	I will kill him saying so
bhrāmyat-gadā-bhīṣaṇaṃ	whirling a formidable mace
daityendraṃ samupādravantam-	the Asura king running towards Thee
adhṛthā dorbhyāṃ pṛthubhyāṃ-amum	(Thou) caught hold of him with two stout arms
vīra: nirgalita:-atha	that clever (Asura) slipped out and then
khaḍga-phalakau gṛhṇan-	holding a sword and shield
vicitra-śramān vyāvṛṇvan	all kinds of astonishing feats displaying
puna:-āpapāta	again rushed
bhuvana-grāsa-udyataṃ tvām-	in a mood to swallow the whole universe, towards Thee
aho	o what wonder
The Asura king rushed towards Thee, whirling a formidable mace and saying that this must be Vishnu and that he would kill him. He was caught hold of by Thy two stout arms. The mighty Asura slipped out from Thy clutches. Then grabbing a sword and shield, he displayed astonishing feats of swordsmanship and rushed towards Thee, who were in a mood to swallow all the worlds. O what a wonder!
bhrāmyantaṃ ditijādhamaṃ punarapi prodgṛhya dorbhyāṃ javāt
dvāre'thoruyuge nipātya nakharān vyutkhāya vakṣobhuvi |
nirbhindannadhigarbhanirbharagaladraktāmbu baddhotsavaṃ
pāyaṃ pāyamudairayo bahu jagatsaṃhārisiṃhāravān ||6||
bhrāmyantam ditija-adhamam	the wicked Asura who was circling around
puna:-api	once again
prodgṛhya dorbhyāṃ javāt	catching with two hands quickly
dvāre-atha-uruyuge nipātya	at the doorway, then,on the two thighs throwing
nakharān vyutkhāya vakṣobhuvi	thrusting (Thy) nails on his chest and tearing
nirbhindan-	and tearing
adhi-garbha-nirbhara-galat-rakta-ambu	gushing out from within the blood fluid
baddhotsavaṃ pāyaṃ pāyam-	drinking and drinking with glee
udairaya: bahu	many times emitted
jagat-saṃhāri-siṃha-āravān	the universe destroying lion roars
Catching hold of the wicked Asura quickly with two hands, who was circling around, Thou threw him flat on Thy lap in the doorway, deeply embedded Thy nails in his chest and tore it open. Thou then with great glee drank again and again the blood that gushed out of the Asura's body,fiercely roaring with lion roars which were powerful enough to shatter the whole universe.
tyaktvā taṃ hatamāśu raktalaharīsiktonnamadvarṣmaṇi
pratyutpatya samastadaityapaṭalīṃ cākhādyamāne tvayi |
bhrāmyadbhūmi vikampitāmbudhikulaṃ vyālolaśailotkaraṃ
protsarpatkhacaraṃ carācaramaho du:sthāmavasthāṃ dadhau ||7||
tyaktvā taṃ hatam-	leaving him who had been killed
āśu	quickly
rakta-laharī-sikta-unnamat-varṣmaṇi	bathed in blood with (Thy) gigantic body
pratyutpatya	leaping (and)
samasta-daitya-paṭalīm	the entire host of Asuras
ca-ākhādyamāne tvayi	when being eaten by thee
bhrāmyad-bhūmi	all the worlds whirled
vikampita-ambudhikulam	the oceans got turbulent
vyālola-śaila-utkaram	all the mountain ranges shook
protsrarpat-khacaram	scattered the stars and heavenly bodies
carācaram-	(as well) all the animate and inanimate
aho	O what a wonder!
du:sthām-avasthāṃ dadhau	unbearable (chaotic state) overtook (prevailed)
Abandoning the dead Asura, Thou sprang up hastily with Thy gigantic body bathed in blood and started eating up the entire host of Asuras. O What a wonder! All the worlds whirled, the oceans got turbulent, the mountains trembled, the stars and celestial luminaries and all animate and inanimate things got scattered. A state of total and unbearable chaos took over.
tāvanmāṃsavapākarālavapuṣaṃ ghorāntramālādharaṃ
tvāṃ madhyesabhamiddhakopamuṣitaṃ durvāragurvāravam |
abhyetuṃ na śaśāka kopi bhuvane dūre sthitā bhīrava:
sarve śarvaviriñcavāsavamukhā: pratyekamastoṣata ||8||
tāvat-	then
māṃsa-vapā-karāla-vapuṣam	(with Thy) body terrific being smeared with flesh and fat
ghora-antra-mālā-dharam	a frightening garland of intestines wearing
tvāṃ madhye-sabham-	Thee in the midst of the assembly
iddha-kopam-uṣitam	sitting in great anger
durvāra-gurvā-ravam	(emitting) unbearable fierce roars
abhyetum na śaśāka	could not approach (Thee)
ka:-api bhuvane	anyone in the world
dūre sthitā bhīrava: sarve	standing far away everyone was afraid
śarva-viriñca-vasavamukhā:	Shiva, Brahmaan Indra, and others
pratyekam-astoṣata	each one praised (and tried to pacify) Thee
Thou sat in the assemblage roaring again and again in great wrath with Thy body forbiddingly terrific being smeared with flesh and fat and garlanded by the intestines (of Hiranyakashipu). Overwhelmed with awe no one dared to approach Thee, and stood far away. Even Shiva, Brahmaa, Indra and others kept at a distance, singing Thy praises individually (and tried to pacify Thee).
bhūyo'pyakṣataroṣadhāmni bhavati brahmājñayā bālake
prahlāde padayornamatyapabhaye kāruṇyabhārākula: |
śāntastvaṃ karamasya mūrdhni samadhā: stotrairathodgāyata-
stasyākāmadhiyo'pi tenitha varaṃ lokāya cānugraham ||9||
bhūya:-api-	even then
akṣata-roṣa-dhāmni	still in an abode of unabated rage
bhavati	(when) Thou were
brahmā-ājñayā	by Brahmaa's instruction
bālake prahlāde padayo:-namati	when the boy Prahlaada prostrated at Thy feet
apabhaye	without any fear
kāruṇya-bhāra-ākula:	overwhelmed with extreme compassion
śānta:-tvaṃ	calmed Thou
karama-asya mūrdhni samadhā:	Thy hand on his head, placed
stotrai:-atha-udgāyata:-tasya	who was loudly singing Thy praise, then, to him
akāmam-dhiya:-api	though he did not have any desire
tenitha varaṃ	(Thou) gave a boon
lokāya ca-anugraham	(which was) also for the good of the world
Even then, when Thou were still in a state of unabated rage, by Brahmaa's instruction the boy Prahlaad free of fear prostrated at Thy feet. Thou calmed down being overcome by love and compassion and placed Thy hand on Prahlaad's head. He burst into a hymn in praise of Thee and unasked for received a boon from Thee which was for the benefit of the whole world.
evaṃ nāṭitaraudraceṣṭita vibho śrītāpanīyābhidha-
śrutyantasfuṭagītasarvamahimannatyantaśuddhākṛte |
tattādṛṅnikhilottaraṃ punaraho kastvāṃ paro laṅghayet
prahlādapriya he marutpurapate sarvāmayātpāhi mām ||10||
evaṃ	in this way
nāṭita-raudra-ceṣṭita	Thou enacted a drama of ferocity
vibho	O All Pervading Lord!
śrītāpanīya-abhidha-śruti-antasfuṭa-	as described in the Shruti named Shri Taapaneeya
gīta-sarva-mahiman-	and all the hymns singing Thy excellences
atyanta-śuddha-ākṛte	O Thee! Who are absolutely pure (free from anger)
tat-tādṛk-nikhila-uttaram	Thee who are superseding everything else
puna:-aho	again, O Lord!
ka:-tvāṃ para: laṅghayet	Who can overcome (outshine) Thee
prahlādapriye	O Beloved of Prahlaad!
he marutpurapate	O Lord of Guruvaayur!
sarva-āmayāt-pāhi mām	be pleased to cure me of all my ailments
In this way Thou enacted a drama of ferocity. O All Pervading Lord! As described in the Shruti named Taapaneeya, as per the hymns of Thy excellences sung therein,Thou are absolutely pure and free from anger. Thou who are thus, superseding everything else, O Lord! who can overcome Thee? O Thou who are fond of Prahlaad! O Lord of Guruvaayur! be pleased to cure me of all my ailments.